DOC Document using GridField with arbitrary data (#409)
silverstripe/developer-docs: en/02_Developer_Guides/03_Forms/07_Using_GridField_With_Arbitrary_Data.md

---
title: Using GridField with Arbitrary Data
summary: Details about using the GridField class for managing data which isn't represented by DataObject models.
icon: table
---

# Using `GridField` with arbitrary data

[`GridField`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridField) is often used for displaying and editing `DataObject` records - but it can be used with other data as well. You might have data that is pulled from an API for example, which you want to display in the admin area of your Silverstripe CMS project.

[info]

> This document assumes you're familiar with `GridField` - see the [`GridField` documentation](/developer_guides/forms/field_types/gridfield/) for about using `GridField`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document assumes you're familiar with `GridField` - see the [`GridField` documentation](/developer_guides/forms/field_types/gridfield/) for information about using `GridField`.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

[/info]

> Data which isn't represented by `DataObject` records can come in two forms: truely arbitrary data wrapped in [`ArrayData`](api:SilverStripe\View\ArrayData), and data which has some specific class to represent it. Both are supported by `GridField`, provided the class representing the data is some subclass of [`ViewableData`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data which isn't represented by `DataObject` records can come in two forms: 
- truely arbitrary data wrapped in [`ArrayData`](api:SilverStripe\View\ArrayData)
- data which has some specific class to represent it. 

Both are supported by `GridField`, provided the class representing the data is some subclass of [`ViewableData`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData).
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> Some components may require specific information, such as which columns to display and how to represent the data in a form. Depending on how you're representing your data, you might need to call specific methods on those components to pass that information in, or you might instead choose to implement methods in your data representation class which the components can call to get that information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some gridifeld components may require specific information, such as which columns to display or how to represent the data in a form. Depending on how you're representing your data, you might need to call specific methods on those components to pass that information in, or you might instead choose to implement methods in your data representation class which the components can call to get that information.
```

Reviewer 2: Done (minus the typo ;p)

## Representing data with `ArrayData`

> Regardless of how you get your data, whether it's from a web API or some other source, you'll need to store it in an `ArrayList`. For best results, each record should also be explicitly instantiated as an `ArrayData` object in the list.

Reviewer: Rando questions, if you had a list class that implemented all the ArrayList/DataList interfaces (SS_List, Filterable, Sortable, Limitable), would gridfield be able to do something with that?

Reviewer 2: Don't see why not. I don't think we need to go into that sort of detail here though. Anyone who has a valid use case for making their own `SS_List` implementation will already know they have to check where they can and can't use it by looking at source code.

```php
use SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridField;
use SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldDataColumns;

$gridField = GridField::create('MyData', 'My data', $list);
$columns = $gridField->getConfig()->getComponentByType(GridFieldDataColumns::class);
$columns->setDisplayFields([
    'FieldName' => 'Column Header Label',
]);
```

If you don't want filtering functionality, you'll also need to remove the [`GridFieldFilterHeader`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldFilterHeader) component from the gridfield:

```php
use SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldFilterHeader;
$gridField->getConfig()->removeComponentsByType(GridFieldFilterHeader::class);
```

### Filtering data {#arraydata-filter}

If you want to be able to filter your `GridField`, you will need to tell the `GridField` which fields to filter against and how to do so. The `GridFieldFilterHeader` uses a [`SearchContext`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\Search\SearchContext) implementation to do most of the heavy lifting.

> Specifically the [`BasicSearchContext`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\Search\BasicSearchContext) is designed to be used for data that isn't represented by `DataObject` records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`BasicSearchContext`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\Search\BasicSearchContext) is designed to be used for data that isn't represented by `DataObject` records.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

[hint]

> The `BasicSearchContext` respects all [customisations for the general search field](/developer_guides/model/scaffolding/#general-search-field). You can therefore set the relevant configuration properties on the `ArrayData` class via YAML configuration and it will be respected.

Reviewer: I don't understand this. Are we saying that, people should set some project wide config on AraryData to enable search? Or is this only relevant if you have a custom class that extends ArrayData?

Reviewer 2: We're specifying `ArrayData` here because this is the section about `ArrayData` - so it applies to `ArrayData`.

Reviewer: The way I'm reading this, it sounds like we are suggesting people add something like this to their YML config if they want to customise their search filters:
```yml
SilverStripe\View\ArrayData:
  searchable_fields:
    - Name
    - BirthDate:
        general: false
```

If that's actually what we are suggesting, then that sounds really weird to me, because that config would apply to every ArrayData object and could break things if you have multiple Gridfield using `ArrayData` object with different structure.

Author: No. This is for the **GENERAL SEARCH FIELD** only. Please go to https://docs.silverstripe.org/en/5/developer_guides/model/scaffolding/#general-search-field (which is what's being linked to) and read up on the general search field.

Reviewer 2: Adding `Name` would do nothing here. This is talking explicitly about the [general search field](https://docs.silverstripe.org/en/5/developer_guides/model/scaffolding/#general-search-field).

But yes people could set a `BirthDate` field to not be used in the general search field in that way if they really wanted to.

Reviewer: Please remove as discussed in meeting.

Reviewer 2: Done

> The only such customisation it doesn't respect is changing the name of the field based on the class you're using to represent your data (i.e. setting the `general_search_field_name` configuration property on your data class). Instead, you can customise the name of the field using the [`BasicSearchContext.general_search_field_name`](api:api:SilverStripe\ORM\Search\BasicSearchContext->general_search_field_name) configuration property.

Reviewer: Any way we could make this clearer? I had to re-read this several times and I'm still not sure I understand it.

Is this only relevant to the `q` parameter ... or do we allow people to rename any search parameter they want?

Also, try using simpler language where possible. e.g.: 

```suggestion
The only exception is changing the name of the field based on the class you're using to represent your data (i.e. setting the `general_search_field_name` configuration property on your data class). Instead, you can customise the name of the field using the [`BasicSearchContext.general_search_field_name`](api:api:SilverStripe\ORM\Search\BasicSearchContext->general_search_field_name) configuration property.
```

Reviewer 2: > Is this only relevant to the `q` parameter ... or do we allow people to rename any search parameter they want?

This is specifically about the "general search field" as documented in the linked section about it (which you're referring to as "the `q` parameter"). Other search parameters are just field names, which of course are customisable in so far as you can provide whatever field names you want to search against.

Reviewer 2: I've made the suggested change.

Reviewer: My main concern here is that most people won't be able to understand what we are talking about. Even after spending several days looking at the code, rereading the sentence multiple times and looking at the "customisations for the general search field", I wasn't sure what I was looking at.

In hindsight, we probably should have tried to find a better description that `general_search_field_name`.

What about something like this?

> The only exception is changing the the `general_search_field_name` parameter. You can customise the `general_search_field_name` parameter name using the [`BasicSearchContext.general_search_field_name`](api:api:SilverStripe\ORM\Search\BasicSearchContext->general_search_field_name) configuration property.
>
> [info]
> Gridfield search provides a "general search field" that allows content author to search multiple properties at once on their result set. The general search field normally uses a `q` parameter to communicate the search term back to the CMS back end. Developers may wish to use a different parameter name for their `general_search_field_name` (e.g. if their dataset has a `q` property.)
> [/info]

Reviewer 2: I've added this text:
> Note that the "general search field" is the default field used for searching, before you click on search options to filter by specific fields on the record.

That should make it abundantly clear what we're talking about, in combination with the existing links to the documentation about that field and the API docs for the configuration property.

The fact that the current name of the general search field is `q` seems irrelevant to me, and referring to the field name as a "parameter" is just incorrect.

[/hint]

```php
use SilverStripe\Forms\FieldList;
use SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldFilterHeader;
use SilverStripe\Forms\HiddenField;
use SilverStripe\Forms\TextField;
use SilverStripe\ORM\Search\BasicSearchContext;

// Instantiate a BasicSearchContext and tell it which fields to search against
$searchContext = BasicSearchContext::create(null);
$searchFields = [
    HiddenField::create(BasicSearchContext::config()->get('general_search_field_name')),
    TextField::create('FeldName', 'Search Field Label'),
];
// Pass the BasicSearchContext into the GridFieldFilterHeader component
$searchContext->setFields(FieldList::create($searchFields));
$gridField->getConfig()->getComponentByType(GridFieldFilterHeader::class)->setSearchContext($searchContext);
```

### Exporting data {#arraydata-export}

If you want to export or print your data, you don't have to do anything special - just make sure to include the `GridFieldExportButton` and `GridFieldPrintButton` components.

> [info]
> These will both use the field list you [passed into `GridFieldDataColumns`](#arraydata-display-as-rows) to know which fields they should use - though you can explicitly call [`GridFieldExportButton::setExportColumns()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldExportButton::setExportColumns()) and [`GridFieldPrintButton::setPrintColumns()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldPrintButton::setPrintColumns()) if you want to export/print different columns than those displayed in the grid view.
> [/info]

Reviewer: I'm not sure why this needs to be in an info block. The info in this paragraph seems like a natural continuation from the previous paragraph.

```suggestion
`GridFieldExportButton` and `GridFieldPrintButton` default to outputting the field list provided to  [`GridFieldDataColumns`](#arraydata-display-as-rows). You can explicitly call [`GridFieldExportButton::setExportColumns()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldExportButton::setExportColumns()) and [`GridFieldPrintButton::setPrintColumns()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldPrintButton::setPrintColumns()) if you want to export/print different columns.
```

Reviewer 2: Done but moved to be _below_ the example. It was in an `info` box to avoid separating the "make sure to include the things" part from the example.

You'll need to add a `GridFieldDetailForm` component to the `GridField` and tell it how to represent your data by passing a [`FieldList`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\FieldList) into [`GridFieldDetailForm::setFields()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldDetailForm::setFields()).

[hint]
Because `ArrayData` doesn't implement a `canEdit()` method, the form will be implicitly turned into a read-only form for you. You don't need to worry about passing in read-only form fields.
[/hint]

```php
use SilverStripe\Forms\FieldList;
use SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldDetailForm;
use SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldViewButton;
use SilverStripe\Forms\HiddenField;
use SilverStripe\Forms\TextField;

$detailForm = GridFieldDetailForm::create();
$detailForm->setFields(FieldList::create([
    HiddenField::create('ID'),
    TextField::create('FeldName', 'View Field Label'),
]));
$gridField->getConfig()->addComponents([
    GridFieldViewButton::create(),
    $detailForm,
]);
```

## Representing data in your own class

> As mentioned in the preamble above, the class representing your data must be a subclass of `ViewableData` in order for it to be used in a `GridField`. It's possible that some components will work even if your class isn't a subclass of `ViewableData`, but that use case is not supported and could break at any time.

Reviewer: As a general principle, you should write each section without assuming that people have read all the previous bit.

I also don't think we should muddy the water by implying that if you choose not to use ViewableData, bits might still be functional.

```suggestion
The class representing your data must be a subclass of `ViewableData` in order for it to be used in a `GridField`.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not assuming they've read it. That's why I'm explicitly mentioning the part above - that way people will know "Ahh, this has been mentioned before, I should probably go read that part as well as it may have some relevant information that isn't being duplicated here"

I don't want to make this suggested change, because pointing out there's more related information above seems useful to me.

I've removed the bit about non-viewabledata.

Reviewer: To the extent that we think previous information is relevant, then we should have a same page link to it then.

Reviewer 2: Added a link

> [info]
> Note that all of the methods that this documentation implements can be ommitted, with exception of the [editing data in a form](#custom-edit) section.
> 
> However, if you omit these method implementations, you must instead pass the required information through to the relevant `GridField` components as shown in [representing data with `ArrayData`](#representing-data-with-arraydata) above.
> [/info]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the methods describe in this arcticle can be ommitted, with exception of the [editing data in a form](#custom-edit) section.

However, if you omit these method implementations, you must pass the required information through to the relevant `GridField` components as shown in [representing data with `ArrayData`](#representing-data-with-arraydata) above.
```

Reviewer 2: Done. But can you please explain when you think `info` callout blocks should be used? It seems like you have a specific set of criteria in your head that should be documented in the contributing docs section.

Reviewer: The [description you added](https://docs.silverstripe.org/en/5/contributing/documentation/#callout-blocks) in the contribution doc:
> "Info box": An info box is useful for adding, deepening or accenting information in the main text. They can be used for background knowledge, or to provide links to further information (ie, a "see also" link).

But maybe we have different interpretation on it. In my mind the content in the infobox should make sense even if it's read out of context. Equally, the surrounding content to the info box should a make sense even if the info box is not there.

In this context, I don't think the info box content could stand alone. I also don't think you could read the _the class representing your data must be a subclass of `ViewableData`_ by itself and understand what's expected.

Reviewer 2: What I wrote there was intended to be an example of the sorts of things that the callout blocks _might_ be useful for, not an exhaustive list of what it _is allowed_ to be used for.

Callout blocks definitely do not need to stand alone - they are contextual. They always relate to the content that surrounds them. You will never see a callout block on its own, so I don't understand where you're coming from with that.

[hint]
You can optionally implement the `i18n_plural_name()` method to return a localised string to represent the singular name of this model. This is used in the add button, breadcrumbs, and toasts.
[/hint]

```php
namespace App\Data;

use SilverStripe\Forms\FieldList;
use SilverStripe\Forms\HiddenField;
use SilverStripe\Forms\TextField;
use SilverStripe\View\ViewableData;

class DataRepresentation extends ViewableData
{
    // ...

    public function getCMSFields()
    {
        return FieldList::create([
            HiddenField::create('ID'),
            TextField::create('FeldName', 'View Field Label'),
        ]);
    }

    // ...
}
```

You will need to have `GridFieldDetailForm` and `GridFieldViewButton` components in your `GridField` config in order to access the form view.

```php
use SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldDetailForm;
use SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldViewButton;

$gridField->getConfig()->addComponents([
    GridFieldViewButton::create(),
    GridFieldDetailForm::create(),
]);
```

### Editing data in a form {#custom-edit}

> To edit data, there are a few extra pre-requisites - but this is where representing the data in your own class gets really powerful.

Reviewer: The second part of the sentence doesn't convey any information.

```suggestion
There are a few extra pre-requisites to allow content authors to edit data.
```

Reviewer 2: It conveys the information that this is a more powerful option than just using `ArrayData` - that's not nothing. It tells people "yes there is a valid use case for this, there are reasons you should use this instead of just `ArrayData`". I'm going to leave it in unless you have a more convincing reason to remove it.

Reviewer 2: I've made the suggested change to the first part of the sentence.

Reviewer: Humm ... I'm thinking if we want to make the case for why you would want to use your own class, we should make it directly after the "Representing data in your own class" header ... rather than in the 5th sub-sub-section.

Maybe something like:

> Representing data in your own class adds some complexity, but empowers your content authors to create, update and delete entries via the GridField.

Reviewer 2: Done and removed the second part of that sentence, even though I still like it :p
